# diceware-java

A Java command-line tool to generate passphrases, based on the diceware
method described at http://www.diceware.com.  While the diceware method 
describes how to generate random passphrases with dice, diceware-java uses
a cryptographically secure random number generator instead, as briefly described
at http://world.std.com/%7Ereinhold/dicewarefaq.html#computer.

TODO: Rename the software to avoid a trademark issue with Diceware.

## Why passphrases?

The case for using a passphrase instead of a password is most succintly
made in an XKCD comic at https://xkcd.com/936/.

TODO fill this section out, referring to www.diceware.com

## Why another passphrase generator?

- I like the diceware approach and explanation for generating passphrases.
- I want an off-line solution whose security I can verify.  I can't verify a 
web-based solution, even if it's based on open-source software, as I can't verify
the deployment.
- I want to experiment with different word lists. 

## How to verify the security of word lists

For full security, a word list should have no duplicates 
(see http://world.std.com/%7Ereinhold/dicewarefaq.html#tampered).

Verifying this condition is a simple matter at a Unix command-line; 
`sort file |uniq -d` shows the duplicate entries from the file, and there 
shouldn't be any.

## On the strength of passphrases generated by diceware-java

To guarantee a uniform distribution of random numbers, diceware-java uses the 
largest prefix of the selected word list that is a whole power of two in 
length. 

For the standard diceware-size word lists of 7776 words, diceware-java
uses only the first 4096 words. This 
approach provides log2(4096) = 12 bits of entropy per word in the passphrase.
A six-word passphrase thus provides 72 bits of entropy, while a seven-word
passphrase provides 84 bits of entropy.

Similary, for the EFF short list of 1296, only the first 1024 words are used. 
This approach yields log2(1024) = 10 bits of entropy
per word, with an 8-word passphrase providing 80 bits of entropy.

# Word lists included with diceware-java

The following files appear in the src/main/resources directory.

<table>
<tr>
    <th>File</th>
    <th>Description</th>
    <th># Entries</th>
    <th>UE: Usable Entries</th>
    <th>E: Entropy bits per word [log2(UE)]</th>
    <th>A: Average word length</th>
    <th>W: # words to get at least 75 entropy bits [ceiling(75/E)]</th>
    <th>Average passphrase length for at least 75 entropy bits [A*W]</th>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>diceware.txt and beale.wordlist.txt</td>
    <td>Standard Diceware word list and alternative word list edited by Alan Beale
    (adapted from http://www.diceware.com).
    The original lists were modified to remove any PGP signatures and the mapping to actual dice to obtain
    simply the words from the list.</td>
    <td>7776</td>
    <td>4096</td>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>4.35</td> 
    <td>7</td>
    <td>30.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>diceware8k.txt and beale.wordlist.8k.txt</td>
    <td>Diceware 8k word list (from http://world.std.com/%7Ereinhold/dicewarefaq.html#computer).
    beale.wordlist.8k.txt was created by extending beale.wordlist.txt with the same bigrams as were added to diceware8k.txt; see
    http://world.std.com/%7Ereinhold/dicewarefaq.html#diceware8k for details.</td>
    <td>8192</td>
    <td>8192</td>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>4.1</td> 
    <td>6</td>
    <td>25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_large_wordlist.txt</td>
    <td>EFF Large word list (from https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/07/new-wordlists-random-passphrases),
    modified to remove the mapping to actual dice to obtain simply the words from the list.</td>
    <td>7776</td>
    <td>4096</td>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>7.0</td> 
    <td>7</td>
    <td>49</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_short_wordlist_1.txt</td>
    <td>First EFF Short word list (from https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/07/new-wordlists-random-passphrases),
    modified to
        remove the mapping to actual dice to obtain
        simply the words from the list.</td>
    <td>1296</td>
    <td>1024</td>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>4.5</td> 
    <td>8</td>
    <td>36</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_large_wordlist.8k.txt</td>
    <td>EFF Large word list extended with same bigrams as diceware8k.txt</td>
    <td>8192</td>
    <td>8192</td>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>6.74</td> 
    <td>6</td>
    <td>40.4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_short_wordlist_1.2k.txt</td>
    <td>First EFF Short word list extended with shortest non-duplicate words from EFF Large word list</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>4.83</td> 
    <td>7</td>
    <td>33.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt</td>
    <td>First EFF Short word list extended with selected bigrams from diceware8k.txt</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>3.61</td> 
    <td>7</td>
    <td>25.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td>eff_short_wordlist_1.pairs.2k.txt</td>
    <td>First EFF Short word list extended with letter and number pairs from diceware.txt</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>2048</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>3.61</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>25.3</td>
</tr>
</table>

According to https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/07/new-wordlists-random-passphrases,
the EFF lists fix a number of problems with the original Diceware list:

> - It contains many rare words such as _buret, novo, vacuo_
> - It contains unusual proper names such as _della, ervin, eaton, moran_
> - It contains a few strange letter sequences such as _aaaa, ll, nbis_
> - It contains some words with punctuation such as _ain't, don't, he'll_
> - It contains individual letters and non-word bigrams like _tl, wq, zf_
> - It contains numbers and variants such as _46, 99_ and _99th_
> - It contains many vulgar words
> - Diceware passwords need spaces to be correctly decoded, e.g. _in_ and
_put_ are in the list as well as _input_.

The final two entries in the table above are my attempt to balance average
word length with ease of memorization. eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt
favors bigrams with one letter and one number, while
eff_short_wordlist_1.pairs.2k.txt favors pairs of two numbers and two
letters.

In the interests of transparency, the following commands were used to add words
to eff_short_wordlist_1.txt:

```
$ cp eff_short_wordlist_1.txt eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt
$ perl -ne 'print if (/^\d[a-z]$/ || /^[a-z]\d$/ || /^[aeiouyn]\w$/ || /^\w[aeiouyst]$/)' diceware8k.txt  >> eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt
$ echo pq >> eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt
$ echo qp >> eff_short_wordlist_1.bigrams.2k.txt

$ cp eff_short_wordlist_1.txt eff_short_wordlist_1.pairs.2k.txt
$ perl -ne 'print if /^\w\w$/' diceware.txt >> eff_short_wordlist_1.pairs.2k.txt
```  

Then 14 letter pairs with q, x, and y were manually removed from eff_short_wordlist_1.pairs.2k.txt
to get precisely 2048 words.

## To build

Gradle and Java 8 are required to build diceware-java.

$ gradle build

## To run

$ java -jar build/libs/diceware-java-0.2.jar --help

## To install

Extract either the tar or zip distribution in build/distributions,
then run the following from the extracted directory:

$ bin/diceware-java --help

Note that both a shell script and a batch file is available in the bin
directory.
